
CHAPTER LXXXVI

How Sir Tristram and Launcelot, with Palomides, came to
joyous Gard; and of Palomides and Sir Tristram.


FAIR knight, said Sir Tristram unto Sir Launcelot, of
whence be ye?  I am a knight errant, said Sir Launcelot,
that rideth to seek many adventures.  What is your name?
said Sir Tristram.  Sir, at this time I will not tell you.
Then Sir Launcelot said unto Sir Tristram and to Palomides:
Now either of you are met together I will depart
from you.  Not so, said Sir Tristram; I pray you of
knighthood to ride with me unto my castle.  Wit you
well, said Sir Launcelot, I may not ride with you, for I
have many deeds to do in other places, that at this time
I may not abide with you.  Ah, mercy Jesu, said Sir
Tristram, I require you as ye be a true knight to the order
of knighthood, play you with me this night.  Then Sir
Tristram had a grant of Sir Launcelot: howbeit though
he had not desired him he would have ridden with them,
outher soon have come after them; for Sir Launcelot came
for none other cause into that country but for to see Sir
Tristram.  And when they were come within Joyous
Gard they alighted, and their horses were led into a stable;
and then they unarmed them.  And when Sir Launcelot
was unhelmed, Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides knew him.
Then Sir Tristram took Sir Launcelot in arms, and so did
La Beale Isoud; and Palomides kneeled down upon his
knees and thanked Sir Launcelot.  When Sir Launcelot
saw Sir Palomides kneel he lightly took him up and said
thus:  Wit thou well, Sir Palomides, I and any knight in
this land, of worship ought of very right succour and
rescue so noble a knight as ye are proved and renowned,
throughout all this realm endlong and overthwart.  And
then was there joy among them, and the oftener that
Sir Palomides saw La Beale Isoud the heavier he waxed
day by day.

Then Sir Launcelot within three or four days departed,
and with him rode Sir Ector de Maris; and Dinadan and
Sir Palomides were there left with Sir Tristram a two
months and more.  But ever Sir Palomides faded and
mourned, that all men had marvel wherefore he faded so
away.  So upon a day, in the dawning, Sir Palomides went
into the forest by himself alone; and there he found a
well, and then he looked into the well, and in the water he
saw his own visage, how he was disturbed and defaded,
nothing like that he was.  What may this mean? said Sir
Palomides, and thus he said to himself:  Ah, Palomides,
Palomides, why art thou defaded, thou that was wont to be
called one of the fairest knights of the world?  I will no
more lead this life, for I love that I may never get nor
recover.  And therewithal he laid him down by the well.
And then he began to make a rhyme of La Beale Isoud
and him.

And in the meanwhile Sir Tristram was that same day
ridden into the forest to chase the hart of greese; but Sir
Tristram would not ride a-hunting never more unarmed,
because of Sir Breuse Saunce Pit
